
# Nov 15th, 2023

## FLIPs

### 179: Staged Contract Updates

* FLIP: [https://github.com/onflow/flips/pull/179](https://github.com/onflow/flips/pull/179)

* Overview:

    * Contract mechanism to define contract update deployments and execute updates in stages at/beyond a block height. Execution can also be delegated to a third party via Capabilities

* Status:

    * Approved

### 217: New behavior for attachments with entitlements

* FLIP: [https://github.com/onflow/flips/pull/213](https://github.com/onflow/flips/pull/213)

* Overview:

    * Current attachment feature, requiring entitlements, allows third-parties to "sneak in" permissions into the base value

    * Proposal removes entitlement requirements, entitlements are derived from reference on base

    * Simple compromise

    * Tradeoff between power and safety. Only use-case that is no longer possible is read-escalation

* Status:

    * "Audit" from security researcher

    * No open problems, proposal is complete and looking for feedback

* Next Steps:

    * Accept unless there is no further feedback until end of next week

## Other

### Cadence 1.0 feedback

* Austin reached out to community, asked for awareness

    * Very little awareness

    * Surprise of breaking changes

    * Breaking changes are not that big of a deal

    * But fact of breaking is scary

* Going to talk to top 20 projects, with Andrea and Albert

    * Awareness

    * Get feedback

    * Support

* Have not "advertised" it much so far

* With rollout plan and environments, tools, etc. "ready", more announcements

* Cadence 1.0 hackathon? (both projects and bug hunting / bug bash)

    * Example: OpenSea Sea Port bug bash

* Cadence 1.0 office hours

* Incentivize update?

* Blackout periods? Awareness through disruption

    * TN

    * How to even do that on MN? Downtime would be brutal

        * Maybe depend on update staged?

* How to amplify message?

    * In tooling like CLI, Emulator, etc.

    * In tools/projects like Flowdiver

    * On Website

* Should not hide / make it very clear that this release is breaking

    * But also explain why the breaking changes are made (security, features, locked down contracts, etc.)

### Cadence 1.0 migration plan

* Had breakout session

* Use Sandboxnet, clean network

    * Run pre-1.0 for a while, allow community to seed the environment with contracts and data

    * Then switch over

* Is a clean Sandboxnet with 1.0 adding much value over Emulator?

    * Not really? For most developers Emulator is enough

    * Some developers don’t bother with the Emulator, go directly to TN

    * Some projects are relying on other projects (e.g FIND on FLOAT)

        * Difficult to have all dependencies deployed themselves in e.g. Emulator or even SN

    * Bringing up clean SN is not much effort

    * Bringing up SN from TN state is a lot of effort

    * "Seeding-period SN" solution good tradeoff
