# Aug 14th, 2023

## Ways to contribute

* Participate in [FLIP (Flow Improvement Proposal) discussions](https://github.com/onflow/flips)
* Contribute to Cadence implementation: ‚û°Ô∏è[GitHub issues](https://github.com/onflow/cadence/issues?q=is%3Aissue+is%3Aopen+sort%3Aupdated-desc+label%3A%22Good+First+Issue%22)
* Contribute Cadence tools: ‚û°Ô∏è[GitHub issues](https://github.com/onflow/cadence-tools/issues?q=is%3Aissue+is%3Aopen+sort%3Aupdated-desc+label%3A%22Good+First+Issue%22)

## FLIPs

### Interface Conformance Improvements

* FLIP: [https://github.com/onflow/flips/pull/83](https://github.com/onflow/flips/pull/83)
* Status:
    * FLIP approved and merged üéâ

### Remove pub, pub(set) and priv

* FLIP: [https://github.com/onflow/flips/pull/84](https://github.com/onflow/flips/pull/84)
* Status:
    * FLIP approved and merged üéâ

### Emit events from function conditions, allow concrete events in interfaces

* FLIP: [https://github.com/onflow/flips/pull/111](https://github.com/onflow/flips/pull/111)
* Status:
    * FLIP approved and merged üéâ

### Remove restricted types, interface set types

* FLIP: [https://github.com/onflow/flips/pull/85](https://github.com/onflow/flips/pull/85)
* Status:
    * FLIP approved and merged üéâ

### Add Range type

* FLIP: [https://github.com/onflow/flips/pull/96](https://github.com/onflow/flips/pull/96)
* Status:
    * FLIP approved and merged üéâ

### External Mutability

* Vision: [https://github.com/onflow/flips/pull/97](https://github.com/onflow/flips/pull/97)
* FLIPs:
    * **Change member access semantic**
        * FLIP: [https://github.com/onflow/flips/pull/89](https://github.com/onflow/flips/pull/89)
        * Status:
            * FLIP approved and merged üéâ
    * **Improve entitlement mappings**
        * FLIP: [https://github.com/onflow/flips/pull/94](https://github.com/onflow/flips/pull/94)
        * Status:
            * FLIP approved and merged üéâ
    * **Introduce built-in mutability entitlements**
        * FLIP: [https://github.com/onflow/flips/pull/86](https://github.com/onflow/flips/pull/86)
        * Status:
            * Positive sentiment
            * No new feedback in last few weeks
            * Implementation and documentation ready
            * Last conversation was about naming convention for entitlements
        * Open problems:
            * None
        * Next steps:
            * **Approved**

### Account Type

* FLIP: [https://github.com/onflow/flips/pull/92](https://github.com/onflow/flips/pull/92)
* Status:
    * Positive sentiment
    * No new feedback in last few weeks
    * Implementation ready
* Open problems:
    * None
* Next steps:
    * **Approved**

### Remove nested type requirements

* FLIP: [https://github.com/onflow/flips/pull/118](https://github.com/onflow/flips/pull/118)
* Overview:
    * Remove nested type requirements
    * Allow declaration of events in interfaces as concrete types (used in core contracts)
* Status:
    * Positive sentiment
    * No new feedback in last few weeks
    * Implementation ready (2 PRs)
* Open problems:
    * None
* Next steps:
    * **Approved**

### Random function

* FLIP: [https://github.com/onflow/flips/pull/118](https://github.com/onflow/flips/pull/118)
* Overview:
    * Rename unsafeRandom to random, underlying implementation has been secured using Flow protocol native random beacon
    * Update the interface to a safer and more convenient one (generalized types and a modulo parameter)
    * Rollout: add random, deprecate unsafeRandom, finally remove in SC release
* Status:
    * Positive sentiment for random
* Open problems:
    * Behavior in scripts
        * Should not panic
        * Several options
    * Naming:
        * Potential for misuse by developers. Unsafe ‚Üí safe renaming might be confusing
        * Maybe addressed by commit-reveal scheme FLIP: [https://github.com/onflow/flips/pull/123](https://github.com/onflow/flips/pull/123)
* Next steps:
    * Determine script behavior, maybe propose in separate FLIP
    * Schedule breakout session
        * Deniz
        * You? Leave a comment!
* Feedback:
    * Just switch unsafeRandom to safe random generator for now
    * Different name/indicator to prevent misuse?
        * Trigger developers to check documentation, see/use commit-reveal scheme design pattern to use returned safe random properly
        * `random(iReadTheDocs: Bool)`
    * Our bar is very high, other systems isn't

### Commit-reveal scheme for non-reverted randomness

* FLIP: [https://github.com/onflow/flips/pull/123](https://github.com/onflow/flips/pull/123)
* Overview:
    * Provide a safe pattern to address transaction abortion after a random is revealed
    * Commit to block
    * In the future, query history of past randoms
    * Use past, committed seed for new random
* Status:
    * Positive sentiment
    * Waiting for feedback
* Open problems:
    * None
* Next steps:
    * Gather more feedback

### Remove custom destructors

* FLIP:  [https://github.com/onflow/flips/pull/131](https://github.com/onflow/flips/pull/131)
* Overview:
    * Proposal to address inability for users to destroy resources they own
    * One of the discussed options (others: try/catch, etc.)
    * Originated from attachments feature (attachment might prevent destruction of whole resource)
    * Remove destroy
    * Allows users to always destroy resources
* Status:
    * New
    * Very much an RFC!
* Open problems:
    * Philosophical question (sending to "burner account")
    * Existing code / applications
    * "Migration" path for use-cases like FT total supply
* Next steps:
    * Discuss
    * Breakout session
        * You? Leave a comment!
    * Publish resource destruction options document, add to FLIP
* Feedback:
    * Provide details on impact on applications, e.g. core contracts like FT/NFT
        * Chicken-and-egg problem: need more data on how feature is used, can then figure out if/what alternative is
    * Even if exploit vector isn‚Äôt used today, it should be addressed/prevented
    * If important use-case exists, also not worth it to remove
    * Emitting events could maybe be allowed
    * Given impact, reach out to more developers / gather more feedback

## Related FLIPs / forum discussions

* [https://forum.onflow.org/t/storage-fees-improvements-and-few-random-ideas-on-the-way/5104](https://forum.onflow.org/t/storage-fees-improvements-and-few-random-ideas-on-the-way/5104)