docs/releasing.md, before:

# Release Process

Assume releasing Cadence version `v0.21.2` from `master` branch. 
Also, assume the latest deployed version on the live networks is `v0.21.0`.

## Using GitHub Actions

Cadence repo provides a set of useful [GitHub actions](https://github.com/onflow/cadence/actions) that can be used to
release a new version of Cadence.

### Checking backward compatibility

Cadence releases should be backwards compatible and are not supposed to have any breaking changes. There may be exceptions from this rule - in those cases any Cadence release that contains breaking changes must be discussed with the wider Flow community and there must be a consensus that the breaking changes are requried to improveve Cadence.
This step ensures the version that is going to be released does not contain such changes.

_If it is expected to have breaking changes in the new version, you may skip this step and proceed to the [releasing](#releasing)
step._

Check for breaking changes can be done using the [BackwardCompatibilityCheck](https://github.com/onflow/cadence/actions/workflows/compatibility-check.yml)
github action.

<img src="images/compatibility_check_action_trigger.png" width="800"/>
 
Run the workflow by providing `master` as the `Current branch/tag` and `v0.21.0` which is the latest deployed version
on the live networks, as the `Base branch/tag`.
Since the release would be based on the current master branch, the compatibility check would compare the current `master` 
branch against `v0.21.0` branch/tag.

<img src="images/compatibility_check_action_params.png" width="300"/>

⚠️ _Note: If the workflow fails due to differences in checking results, you may want to analyze the outputs/diff to see
whether they are actual breaking changes.
The workflow also uploads the checking results as artifacts, which can be downloaded and analyzed manually._

### Releasing

Releasing a new version of Cadence can be easily done by using the [Release GitHub action](https://github.com/onflow/cadence/actions/workflows/release.yml)
Run the workflow by providing `v0.21.2` as the `Release version` and `master` as the
`Base branch`.

<img src="images/release_action.png" width="800"/>

If everything goes well, this will create and push a new tag `v0.21.2` for the release.

It'll also create a new branch `release/v0.21.2` on the repo and a PR to merge the version bump changes (version number constant in version.go, etc.) to the
base branch (`master` in this case).


## Manual Steps

⚠️ _It is highly recommended to use the [GitHub actions](#using-github-actions) for releasing a new Cadence version._

### Checking backward compatibility

- Checkout the `master` branch
  ```
  git checkout master
  ```
- Create a `tmp` directory to store outputs.
  ```
  mkdir tmp
  ```
- Download contracts for **mainnet**, by running the batch-script tool.
  ```
  cd ./tools/batch-script
  go run ./cmd/get_contracts/main.go --chain=flow-mainnet --u=access.mainnet.nodes.onflow.org:9000 > ../../tmp/mainnet_contracts.csv
  cd ../..
  ```
- Navigate to the `compatibility-check` tool and update it to use the Cadence branch from which the new release
  would be created.
  Here, since the release would also be done on the master branch, the current branch would also be `master`.
  ```
  cd ./tools/compatibility-check
  go get github.com/onflow/cadence@master
  go mod tidy
  ```
- Check the contracts using the current branch.
  This will write the parsing and checking errors to the `tmp/mainnet_output_new.txt` file.
  ```
  go run ./cmd/check_contracts/main.go ../../tmp/mainnet_contracts.csv ../../tmp/mainnet_output_new.txt
  ```
- Update the tool to Cadence version that is currently deployed on networks (`v0.21.0`), and repeat the previous step.
  ```
  go get github.com/onflow/cadence@v0.21.0
  go mod tidy
  go run ./cmd/check_contracts/main.go ../../tmp/mainnet_contracts.csv ../../tmp/mainnet_output_old.txt
  cd ../..
  ```
- Compare the diff between the two outputs.
  ```
  cd ./tools/compatibility-check
  go run ./cmd/check_diff/main.go ../../tmp/output-old.txt ../../tmp/output-new.txt
  ```
- If there is a difference in the errors reported, then there are potential breaking changes.
- Repeat the same steps for **testnet** as well. Use `--chain=flow-testnet --u=access.testnet.nodes.onflow.org:9000`
  flags when running the `go run ./cmd/get_contracts/main.go` command.

If it is deemed that there are no breaking changes, proceed to the [Releasing](#releasing-1) steps.

### Releasing

- Checkout the base branch.
  ```
  git checkout master
  ```
- Create a release branch.
  ```
  git checkout -b release/v0.21.2
  ```
- Update the version numbers in the code.
  ```
  make release bump=0.21.2
  ```
- Run tests and linter. Ensure they pass successfully.
  ```
  make test && make lint
  ```
- Commit the changes with message `v0.21.2`
  ```
  git commit -m "v0.21.2"
  ```
- Create a new tag `v0.21.2` and push to the remote repo.
  ```
  git tag v0.21.2 && git push origin v0.21.2
  ```
- Push the release branch `release/v0.21.2` that contains the version bump changes.
  ```
  git push origin release/v0.21.2
  ```
- Finally, open a PR from `release/v0.21.2` branch to the base branch (`master` in this case),
  to include the version bump changes.

Commit message:

document how to create a GitHub release

docs/releasing.md, after:

# Release Process

Assume releasing Cadence version `v0.21.2` from `master` branch.
Also, assume the latest deployed version on the live networks is `v0.21.0`.

## Using GitHub Actions

Cadence repo provides a set of useful [GitHub actions](https://github.com/onflow/cadence/actions) that can be used to
release a new version of Cadence.

### Checking backward compatibility

Cadence releases should be backwards compatible and are not supposed to have any breaking changes. There may be exceptions from this rule - in those cases any Cadence release that contains breaking changes must be discussed with the wider Flow community and there must be a consensus that the breaking changes are requried to improveve Cadence.
This step ensures the version that is going to be released does not contain such changes.

_If it is expected to have breaking changes in the new version, you may skip this step and proceed to the [releasing](#releasing)
step._

Check for breaking changes can be done using the [BackwardCompatibilityCheck](https://github.com/onflow/cadence/actions/workflows/compatibility-check.yml)
github action.

<img src="images/compatibility_check_action_trigger.png" width="800"/>

Run the workflow by providing `master` as the `Current branch/tag` and `v0.21.0` which is the latest deployed version
on the live networks, as the `Base branch/tag`.
Since the release would be based on the current master branch, the compatibility check would compare the current `master`
branch against `v0.21.0` branch/tag.

<img src="images/compatibility_check_action_params.png" width="300"/>

⚠️ _Note: If the workflow fails due to differences in checking results, you may want to analyze the outputs/diff to see
whether they are actual breaking changes.
The workflow also uploads the checking results as artifacts, which can be downloaded and analyzed manually._

### Releasing

Releasing a new version of Cadence can be easily done by using the [Release GitHub action](https://github.com/onflow/cadence/actions/workflows/release.yml)
Run the workflow by providing `v0.21.2` as the `Release version` and `master` as the
`Base branch`.

<img src="images/release_action.png" width="800"/>

If everything goes well, this will create and push a new tag `v0.21.2` for the release.

It'll also create a new branch `release/v0.21.2` on the repo and a PR to merge the version bump changes (version number constant in version.go, etc.) to the
base branch (`master` in this case).


## Manual Steps

⚠️ _It is highly recommended to use the [GitHub actions](#using-github-actions) for releasing a new Cadence version._

### Checking backward compatibility

- Checkout the `master` branch
  ```
  git checkout master
  ```
- Create a `tmp` directory to store outputs.
  ```
  mkdir tmp
  ```
- Download contracts for **mainnet**, by running the batch-script tool.
  ```
  cd ./tools/batch-script
  go run ./cmd/get_contracts/main.go --chain=flow-mainnet --u=access.mainnet.nodes.onflow.org:9000 > ../../tmp/mainnet_contracts.csv
  cd ../..
  ```
- Navigate to the `compatibility-check` tool and update it to use the Cadence branch from which the new release
  would be created.
  Here, since the release would also be done on the master branch, the current branch would also be `master`.
  ```
  cd ./tools/compatibility-check
  go get github.com/onflow/cadence@master
  go mod tidy
  ```
- Check the contracts using the current branch.
  This will write the parsing and checking errors to the `tmp/mainnet_output_new.txt` file.
  ```
  go run ./cmd/check_contracts/main.go ../../tmp/mainnet_contracts.csv ../../tmp/mainnet_output_new.txt
  ```
- Update the tool to Cadence version that is currently deployed on networks (`v0.21.0`), and repeat the previous step.
  ```
  go get github.com/onflow/cadence@v0.21.0
  go mod tidy
  go run ./cmd/check_contracts/main.go ../../tmp/mainnet_contracts.csv ../../tmp/mainnet_output_old.txt
  cd ../..
  ```
- Compare the diff between the two outputs.
  ```
  cd ./tools/compatibility-check
  go run ./cmd/check_diff/main.go ../../tmp/output-old.txt ../../tmp/output-new.txt
  ```
- If there is a difference in the errors reported, then there are potential breaking changes.
- Repeat the same steps for **testnet** as well. Use `--chain=flow-testnet --u=access.testnet.nodes.onflow.org:9000`
  flags when running the `go run ./cmd/get_contracts/main.go` command.

If it is deemed that there are no breaking changes, proceed to the [Releasing](#releasing-1) steps.

### Releasing

- Checkout the base branch.
  ```
  git checkout master
  ```
- Create a release branch.
  ```
  git checkout -b release/v0.21.2
  ```
- Update the version numbers in the code.
  ```
  make release bump=0.21.2
  ```
- Run tests and linter. Ensure they pass successfully.
  ```
  make test && make lint
  ```
- Commit the changes with message `v0.21.2`
  ```
  git commit -m "v0.21.2"
  ```
- Create a new tag `v0.21.2` and push to the remote repo.
  ```
  git tag v0.21.2 && git push origin v0.21.2
  ```
- Push the release branch `release/v0.21.2` that contains the version bump changes.
  ```
  git push origin release/v0.21.2
  ```
- Finally, open a PR from `release/v0.21.2` branch to the base branch (`master` in this case),
  to include the version bump changes.


## Creating a new GitHub release

Once the PR which updates the version got merged, a GitHub release can be created.

Go to the overview of all tags and select "Create release":

<img src="images/release_tag.png" width="800"/>

On the release page, click the "Generate release notes" button:

<img src="images/create_release.png" width="800"/>

Edit the pre-populated description, e.g. by summarizing multiple PRs that contributed to a single feature,
as readers might not be and should not have to be familiar with the implementation details.

By default, the new release is set as the latest release.
Usually this is the case, but uncheck this e.g. when releasing a bugfix release for an older version.

Finally, click "Publish release", and you are all done! 🎉
