docs/language/composite-types.mdx, before:

---
title: Composite Types
---

Composite types allow composing simpler types into more complex types,
i.e., they allow the composition of multiple values into one.
Composite types have a name and consist of zero or more named fields,
and zero or more functions that operate on the data.
Each field may have a different type.

Composite types can only be declared within a [contract](contracts) and nowhere else.

There are two kinds of composite types.
The kinds differ in their usage and the behaviour
when a value is used as the initial value for a constant or variable,
when the value is assigned to a variable,
when the value is passed as an argument to a function,
and when the value is returned from a function:

- [**Structures**](#structures) are **copied**, they are value types.

    Structures are useful when copies with independent state are desired.

- [**Resources**](#resources) are **moved**, they are linear types and **must** be used **exactly once**.

    Resources are useful when it is desired to model ownership
    (a value exists exactly in one location and it should not be lost).

    Certain constructs in a blockchain represent assets of real, tangible value,
    as much as a house or car or bank account.
    We have to worry about literal loss and theft,
    perhaps even on the scale of millions of dollars.

    Structures are not an ideal way to represent this ownership because they are copied.
    This would mean that there could be a risk of having multiple copies
    of certain assets floating around,
    which breaks the scarcity requirements needed for these assets to have real value.

    A structure is much more useful for representing information
    that can be grouped together in a logical way,
    but doesn't have value or a need to be able to be owned or transferred.

    A structure could for example be used to contain the information associated
    with a division of a company,
    but a resource would be used to represent the assets that have been allocated
    to that organization for spending.

Nesting of resources is only allowed within other resource types,
or in data structures like arrays and dictionaries,
but not in structures, as that would allow resources to be copied.

## Composite Type Declaration and Creation

Structures are declared using the `struct` keyword
and resources are declared using the `resource` keyword.
The keyword is followed by the name.

```cadence
pub struct SomeStruct {
    // ...
}

pub resource SomeResource {
    // ...
}
```

Structures and resources are types.

Structures are created (instantiated) by calling the type like a function.

```cadence
// instantiate a new struct object and assign it to a constant
let a = SomeStruct()
```

The constructor function may require parameters if the [initializer](#composite-type-fields)
of the composite type requires them.

Composite types can only be declared within [contracts](contracts)
and not locally in functions.


Resource must be created (instantiated) by using the `create` keyword
and calling the type like a function.

Resources can only be created in functions and types
that are declared in the same contract in which the resource is declared.

```cadence
// instantiate a new resource object and assign it to a constant
let b <- create SomeResource()
```

## Composite Type Fields

Fields are declared like variables and constants.
However, the initial values for fields are set in the initializer,
**not** in the field declaration.
All fields **must** be initialized in the initializer, exactly once.

Having to provide initial values in the initializer might seem restrictive,
but this ensures that all fields are always initialized in one location, the initializer,
and the initialization order is clear.

The initialization of all fields is checked statically
and it is invalid to not initialize all fields in the initializer.
Also, it is statically checked that a field is definitely initialized before it is used.

The initializer's main purpose is to initialize fields, though it may also contain other code.
Just like a function, it may declare parameters and may contain arbitrary code.
However, it has no return type, i.e., it is always `Void`.

The initializer is declared using the `init` keyword.

The initializer always follows any fields.

There are three kinds of fields:

- **Constant fields** are also stored in the composite value,
    but after they have been initialized with a value
    they **cannot** have new values assigned to them afterwards.
    A constant field must be initialized exactly once.

    Constant fields are declared using the `let` keyword.

- **Variable fields** are stored in the composite value
    and can have new values assigned to them.

    Variable fields are declared using the `var` keyword.

| Field Kind           | Assignable         | Keyword     |
|----------------------|--------------------|-------------|
| **Variable field**   | Yes                | `var`       |
| **Constant field**   | **No**             | `let`       |

In initializers, the special constant `self` refers to the composite value
that is to be initialized.

Field types must be storable. Non-storable types are:

- Functions
- [Accounts (`AuthAccount` / `PublicAccount`)](accounts)
- [Transactions](transactions)
- [References](references): References are ephemeral.
  Consider [storing a capability and borrowing it](capability-based-access-control) when needed instead.

Fields can be read (if they are constant or variable) and set (if they are variable),
using the access syntax: the composite value is followed by a dot (`.`)
and the name of the field.

```cadence
// Declare a structure named `Token`, which has a constant field
// named `id` and a variable field named `balance`.
//
// Both fields are initialized through the initializer.
//
// The public access modifier `pub` is used in this example to allow
// the fields to be read in outer scopes. Fields can also be declared
// private so they cannot be accessed in outer scopes.
// Access control will be explained in a later section.
//
pub struct Token {
    pub let id: Int
    pub var balance: Int

    init(id: Int, balance: Int) {
        self.id = id
        self.balance = balance
    }
}
```

Note that it is invalid to provide the initial value for a field in the field declaration.

```cadence
pub struct StructureWithConstantField {
    // Invalid: It is invalid to provide an initial value in the field declaration.
    // The field must be initialized by setting the initial value in the initializer.
    //
    pub let id: Int = 1
}
```

The field access syntax must be used to access fields –  fields are not available as variables.

```cadence
pub struct Token {
    pub let id: Int

    init(initialID: Int) {
        // Invalid: There is no variable with the name `id` available.
        // The field `id` must be initialized by setting `self.id`.
        //
        id = initialID
    }
}
```

The initializer is **not** automatically derived from the fields, it must be explicitly declared.

```cadence
pub struct Token {
    pub let id: Int

    // Invalid: Missing initializer initializing field `id`.
}
```

A composite value can be created by calling the constructor and providing
the field values as arguments.

The value's fields can be accessed on the object after it is created.

```cadence
let token = Token(id: 42, balance: 1_000_00)

token.id  // is `42`
token.balance  // is `1_000_000`

token.balance = 1
// `token.balance` is `1`

// Invalid: assignment to constant field
//
token.id = 23
```

Initializers do not support overloading.

## Composite Type Functions

Composite types may contain functions.
Just like in the initializer, the special constant `self` refers to the composite value
that the function is called on.

```cadence
// Declare a structure named "Rectangle", which represents a rectangle
// and has variable fields for the width and height.
//
pub struct Rectangle {
    pub var width: Int
    pub var height: Int

    init(width: Int, height: Int) {
        self.width = width
        self.height = height
    }

    // Declare a function named "scale", which scales
    // the rectangle by the given factor.
    //
    pub fun scale(factor: Int) {
        self.width = self.width * factor
        self.height = self.height * factor
    }
}

let rectangle = Rectangle(width: 2, height: 3)
rectangle.scale(factor: 4)
// `rectangle.width` is `8`
// `rectangle.height` is `12`
```

 Functions do not support overloading.

## Composite Type Subtyping

Two composite types are compatible if and only if they refer to the same declaration by name,
i.e., nominal typing applies instead of structural typing.

Even if two composite types declare the same fields and functions,
the types are only compatible if their names match.

```cadence
// Declare a structure named `A` which has a function `test`
// which has type `((): Void)`.
//
struct A {
    fun test() {}
}

// Declare a structure named `B` which has a function `test`
// which has type `((): Void)`.
//
struct B {
    fun test() {}
}

// Declare a variable named which accepts values of type `A`.
//
var something: A = A()

// Invalid: Assign a value of type `B` to the variable.
// Even though types `A` and `B` have the same declarations,
// a function with the same name and type, the types' names differ,
// so they are not compatible.
//
something = B()

// Valid: Reassign a new value of type `A`.
//
something = A()
```

## Composite Type Behaviour

### Structures

Structures are **copied** when
used as an initial value for constant or variable,
when assigned to a different variable,
when passed as an argument to a function,
and when returned from a function.

Accessing a field or calling a function of a structure does not copy it.

```cadence
// Declare a structure named `SomeStruct`, with a variable integer field.
//
pub struct SomeStruct {
    pub var value: Int

    init(value: Int) {
        self.value = value
    }

    fun increment() {
        self.value = self.value + 1
    }
}

// Declare a constant with value of structure type `SomeStruct`.
//
let a = SomeStruct(value: 0)

// *Copy* the structure value into a new constant.
//
let b = a

b.value = 1
// NOTE: `b.value` is 1, `a.value` is *`0`*

b.increment()
// `b.value` is 2, `a.value` is `0`
```

### Accessing Fields and Functions of Composite Types Using Optional Chaining

If a composite type with fields and functions is wrapped in an optional,
optional chaining can be used to get those values or call the function without
having to get the value of the optional first.

Optional chaining is used by adding a `?`
before the `.` access operator for fields or
functions of an optional composite type.

When getting a field value or
calling a function with a return value, the access returns
the value as an optional.
If the object doesn't exist, the value will always be `nil`

When calling a function on an optional like this, if the object doesn't exist,
nothing will happen and the execution will continue.

It is still invalid to access an undeclared field
of an optional composite type.

```cadence
// Declare a struct with a field and method.
pub struct Value {
    pub var number: Int

    init() {
        self.number = 2
    }

    pub fun set(new: Int) {
        self.number = new
    }

    pub fun setAndReturn(new: Int): Int {
        self.number = new
        return new
    }
}

// Create a new instance of the struct as an optional
let value: Value? = Value()
// Create another optional with the same type, but nil
let noValue: Value? = nil

// Access the `number` field using optional chaining
let twoOpt = value?.number
// Because `value` is an optional, `twoOpt` has type `Int?`
let two = twoOpt ?? 0
// `two` is `2`

// Try to access the `number` field of `noValue`, which has type `Value?`.
// This still returns an `Int?`
let nilValue = noValue?.number
// This time, since `noValue` is `nil`, `nilValue` will also be `nil`

// Try to call the `set` function of `value`.
// The function call is performed, as `value` is not nil
value?.set(new: 4)

// Try to call the `set` function of `noValue`.
// The function call is *not* performed, as `noValue` is nil
noValue?.set(new: 4)

// Call the `setAndReturn` function, which returns an `Int`.
// Because `value` is an optional, the return value is type `Int?`
let sixOpt = value?.setAndReturn(new: 6)
let six = sixOpt ?? 0
// `six` is `6`
```

This is also possible by using the force-unwrap operator (`!`).

Forced-Optional chaining is used by adding a `!`
before the `.` access operator for fields or
functions of an optional composite type.

When getting a field value or calling a function with a return value,
the access returns the value.
If the object doesn't exist, the execution will panic and revert.

It is still invalid to access an undeclared field
of an optional composite type.

```cadence
// Declare a struct with a field and method.
pub struct Value {
    pub var number: Int

    init() {
        self.number = 2
    }

    pub fun set(new: Int) {
        self.number = new
    }

    pub fun setAndReturn(new: Int): Int {
        self.number = new
        return new
    }
}

// Create a new instance of the struct as an optional
let value: Value? = Value()
// Create another optional with the same type, but nil
let noValue: Value? = nil

// Access the `number` field using force-optional chaining
let two = value!.number
// `two` is `2`

// Try to access the `number` field of `noValue`, which has type `Value?`
// Run-time error: This time, since `noValue` is `nil`,
// the program execution will revert
let number = noValue!.number

// Call the `set` function of the struct

// This succeeds and sets the value to 4
value!.set(new: 4)

// Run-time error: Since `noValue` is nil, the value is not set
// and the program execution reverts.
noValue!.set(new: 4)

// Call the `setAndReturn` function, which returns an `Int`
// Because we use force-unwrap before calling the function,
// the return value is type `Int`
let six = value!.setAndReturn(new: 6)
// `six` is `6`
```

### Resources

Resources are explained in detail [in the following page](resources).

Commit message:

add documentation for pure initializers

docs/language/composite-types.mdx, after:

---
title: Composite Types
---

Composite types allow composing simpler types into more complex types,
i.e., they allow the composition of multiple values into one.
Composite types have a name and consist of zero or more named fields,
and zero or more functions that operate on the data.
Each field may have a different type.

Composite types can only be declared within a [contract](contracts) and nowhere else.

There are two kinds of composite types.
The kinds differ in their usage and the behaviour
when a value is used as the initial value for a constant or variable,
when the value is assigned to a variable,
when the value is passed as an argument to a function,
and when the value is returned from a function:

- [**Structures**](#structures) are **copied**, they are value types.

    Structures are useful when copies with independent state are desired.

- [**Resources**](#resources) are **moved**, they are linear types and **must** be used **exactly once**.

    Resources are useful when it is desired to model ownership
    (a value exists exactly in one location and it should not be lost).

    Certain constructs in a blockchain represent assets of real, tangible value,
    as much as a house or car or bank account.
    We have to worry about literal loss and theft,
    perhaps even on the scale of millions of dollars.

    Structures are not an ideal way to represent this ownership because they are copied.
    This would mean that there could be a risk of having multiple copies
    of certain assets floating around,
    which breaks the scarcity requirements needed for these assets to have real value.

    A structure is much more useful for representing information
    that can be grouped together in a logical way,
    but doesn't have value or a need to be able to be owned or transferred.

    A structure could for example be used to contain the information associated
    with a division of a company,
    but a resource would be used to represent the assets that have been allocated
    to that organization for spending.

Nesting of resources is only allowed within other resource types,
or in data structures like arrays and dictionaries,
but not in structures, as that would allow resources to be copied.

## Composite Type Declaration and Creation

Structures are declared using the `struct` keyword
and resources are declared using the `resource` keyword.
The keyword is followed by the name.

```cadence
pub struct SomeStruct {
    // ...
}

pub resource SomeResource {
    // ...
}
```

Structures and resources are types.

Structures are created (instantiated) by calling the type like a function.

```cadence
// instantiate a new struct object and assign it to a constant
let a = SomeStruct()
```

The constructor function may require parameters if the [initializer](#composite-type-fields)
of the composite type requires them.

Composite types can only be declared within [contracts](contracts)
and not locally in functions.


Resource must be created (instantiated) by using the `create` keyword
and calling the type like a function.

Resources can only be created in functions and types
that are declared in the same contract in which the resource is declared.

```cadence
// instantiate a new resource object and assign it to a constant
let b <- create SomeResource()
```

## Composite Type Fields

Fields are declared like variables and constants.
However, the initial values for fields are set in the initializer,
**not** in the field declaration.
All fields **must** be initialized in the initializer, exactly once.

Having to provide initial values in the initializer might seem restrictive,
but this ensures that all fields are always initialized in one location, the initializer,
and the initialization order is clear.

The initialization of all fields is checked statically
and it is invalid to not initialize all fields in the initializer.
Also, it is statically checked that a field is definitely initialized before it is used.

The initializer's main purpose is to initialize fields, though it may also contain other code.
Just like a function, it may declare parameters and may contain arbitrary code.
However, it has no return type, i.e., it is always `Void`.

The initializer is declared using the `init` keyword.

The initializer always follows any fields.

There are three kinds of fields:

- **Constant fields** are also stored in the composite value,
    but after they have been initialized with a value
    they **cannot** have new values assigned to them afterwards.
    A constant field must be initialized exactly once.

    Constant fields are declared using the `let` keyword.

- **Variable fields** are stored in the composite value
    and can have new values assigned to them.

    Variable fields are declared using the `var` keyword.

| Field Kind           | Assignable         | Keyword     |
|----------------------|--------------------|-------------|
| **Variable field**   | Yes                | `var`       |
| **Constant field**   | **No**             | `let`       |

In initializers, the special constant `self` refers to the composite value
that is to be initialized.

Field types must be storable. Non-storable types are:

- Functions
- [Accounts (`AuthAccount` / `PublicAccount`)](accounts)
- [Transactions](transactions)
- [References](references): References are ephemeral.
  Consider [storing a capability and borrowing it](capability-based-access-control) when needed instead.

Fields can be read (if they are constant or variable) and set (if they are variable),
using the access syntax: the composite value is followed by a dot (`.`)
and the name of the field.

```cadence
// Declare a structure named `Token`, which has a constant field
// named `id` and a variable field named `balance`.
//
// Both fields are initialized through the initializer.
//
// The public access modifier `pub` is used in this example to allow
// the fields to be read in outer scopes. Fields can also be declared
// private so they cannot be accessed in outer scopes.
// Access control will be explained in a later section.
//
pub struct Token {
    pub let id: Int
    pub var balance: Int

    init(id: Int, balance: Int) {
        self.id = id
        self.balance = balance
    }
}
```

Note that it is invalid to provide the initial value for a field in the field declaration.

```cadence
pub struct StructureWithConstantField {
    // Invalid: It is invalid to provide an initial value in the field declaration.
    // The field must be initialized by setting the initial value in the initializer.
    //
    pub let id: Int = 1
}
```

The field access syntax must be used to access fields –  fields are not available as variables.

```cadence
pub struct Token {
    pub let id: Int

    init(initialID: Int) {
        // Invalid: There is no variable with the name `id` available.
        // The field `id` must be initialized by setting `self.id`.
        //
        id = initialID
    }
}
```

The initializer is **not** automatically derived from the fields, it must be explicitly declared.

```cadence
pub struct Token {
    pub let id: Int

    // Invalid: Missing initializer initializing field `id`.
}
```

A composite value can be created by calling the constructor and providing
the field values as arguments.

The value's fields can be accessed on the object after it is created.

```cadence
let token = Token(id: 42, balance: 1_000_00)

token.id  // is `42`
token.balance  // is `1_000_000`

token.balance = 1
// `token.balance` is `1`

// Invalid: assignment to constant field
//
token.id = 23
```

Initializers do not support overloading.

Initializers can also be declared with the `pure` keyword, to indicate that they do not perform any impure operations, and
to allow them to be called from within other `pure` functions. In an initializer, writes to `self` are not considered impure
like they are within other composite functions; as the value being constructed here is by definition local to the context 
calling the initializer. 

```cadence
pub struct Token {
    pub let id: Int
    pub var balance: Int

    pure init(id: Int, balance: Int) {
        self.id = id
        self.balance = balance
    }
}
```

## Composite Type Functions

Composite types may contain functions.
Just like in the initializer, the special constant `self` refers to the composite value
that the function is called on.

```cadence
// Declare a structure named "Rectangle", which represents a rectangle
// and has variable fields for the width and height.
//
pub struct Rectangle {
    pub var width: Int
    pub var height: Int

    init(width: Int, height: Int) {
        self.width = width
        self.height = height
    }

    // Declare a function named "scale", which scales
    // the rectangle by the given factor.
    //
    pub fun scale(factor: Int) {
        self.width = self.width * factor
        self.height = self.height * factor
    }
}

let rectangle = Rectangle(width: 2, height: 3)
rectangle.scale(factor: 4)
// `rectangle.width` is `8`
// `rectangle.height` is `12`
```

 Functions do not support overloading.

## Composite Type Subtyping

Two composite types are compatible if and only if they refer to the same declaration by name,
i.e., nominal typing applies instead of structural typing.

Even if two composite types declare the same fields and functions,
the types are only compatible if their names match.

```cadence
// Declare a structure named `A` which has a function `test`
// which has type `((): Void)`.
//
struct A {
    fun test() {}
}

// Declare a structure named `B` which has a function `test`
// which has type `((): Void)`.
//
struct B {
    fun test() {}
}

// Declare a variable named which accepts values of type `A`.
//
var something: A = A()

// Invalid: Assign a value of type `B` to the variable.
// Even though types `A` and `B` have the same declarations,
// a function with the same name and type, the types' names differ,
// so they are not compatible.
//
something = B()

// Valid: Reassign a new value of type `A`.
//
something = A()
```

## Composite Type Behaviour

### Structures

Structures are **copied** when
used as an initial value for constant or variable,
when assigned to a different variable,
when passed as an argument to a function,
and when returned from a function.

Accessing a field or calling a function of a structure does not copy it.

```cadence
// Declare a structure named `SomeStruct`, with a variable integer field.
//
pub struct SomeStruct {
    pub var value: Int

    init(value: Int) {
        self.value = value
    }

    fun increment() {
        self.value = self.value + 1
    }
}

// Declare a constant with value of structure type `SomeStruct`.
//
let a = SomeStruct(value: 0)

// *Copy* the structure value into a new constant.
//
let b = a

b.value = 1
// NOTE: `b.value` is 1, `a.value` is *`0`*

b.increment()
// `b.value` is 2, `a.value` is `0`
```

### Accessing Fields and Functions of Composite Types Using Optional Chaining

If a composite type with fields and functions is wrapped in an optional,
optional chaining can be used to get those values or call the function without
having to get the value of the optional first.

Optional chaining is used by adding a `?`
before the `.` access operator for fields or
functions of an optional composite type.

When getting a field value or
calling a function with a return value, the access returns
the value as an optional.
If the object doesn't exist, the value will always be `nil`

When calling a function on an optional like this, if the object doesn't exist,
nothing will happen and the execution will continue.

It is still invalid to access an undeclared field
of an optional composite type.

```cadence
// Declare a struct with a field and method.
pub struct Value {
    pub var number: Int

    init() {
        self.number = 2
    }

    pub fun set(new: Int) {
        self.number = new
    }

    pub fun setAndReturn(new: Int): Int {
        self.number = new
        return new
    }
}

// Create a new instance of the struct as an optional
let value: Value? = Value()
// Create another optional with the same type, but nil
let noValue: Value? = nil

// Access the `number` field using optional chaining
let twoOpt = value?.number
// Because `value` is an optional, `twoOpt` has type `Int?`
let two = twoOpt ?? 0
// `two` is `2`

// Try to access the `number` field of `noValue`, which has type `Value?`.
// This still returns an `Int?`
let nilValue = noValue?.number
// This time, since `noValue` is `nil`, `nilValue` will also be `nil`

// Try to call the `set` function of `value`.
// The function call is performed, as `value` is not nil
value?.set(new: 4)

// Try to call the `set` function of `noValue`.
// The function call is *not* performed, as `noValue` is nil
noValue?.set(new: 4)

// Call the `setAndReturn` function, which returns an `Int`.
// Because `value` is an optional, the return value is type `Int?`
let sixOpt = value?.setAndReturn(new: 6)
let six = sixOpt ?? 0
// `six` is `6`
```

This is also possible by using the force-unwrap operator (`!`).

Forced-Optional chaining is used by adding a `!`
before the `.` access operator for fields or
functions of an optional composite type.

When getting a field value or calling a function with a return value,
the access returns the value.
If the object doesn't exist, the execution will panic and revert.

It is still invalid to access an undeclared field
of an optional composite type.

```cadence
// Declare a struct with a field and method.
pub struct Value {
    pub var number: Int

    init() {
        self.number = 2
    }

    pub fun set(new: Int) {
        self.number = new
    }

    pub fun setAndReturn(new: Int): Int {
        self.number = new
        return new
    }
}

// Create a new instance of the struct as an optional
let value: Value? = Value()
// Create another optional with the same type, but nil
let noValue: Value? = nil

// Access the `number` field using force-optional chaining
let two = value!.number
// `two` is `2`

// Try to access the `number` field of `noValue`, which has type `Value?`
// Run-time error: This time, since `noValue` is `nil`,
// the program execution will revert
let number = noValue!.number

// Call the `set` function of the struct

// This succeeds and sets the value to 4
value!.set(new: 4)

// Run-time error: Since `noValue` is nil, the value is not set
// and the program execution reverts.
noValue!.set(new: 4)

// Call the `setAndReturn` function, which returns an `Int`
// Because we use force-unwrap before calling the function,
// the return value is type `Int`
let six = value!.setAndReturn(new: 6)
// `six` is `6`
```

### Resources

Resources are explained in detail [in the following page](resources).
